Pelham said Sunday night there was research being done on whether the `` quickie '' vote on the increase can be repealed outright or whether notice would have to first be given that reconsideration of the action would be sought .
It says that `` in the event Congress does provide this increase in federal funds '' , the State Board of Education should be directed to `` give priority '' to teacher pay raises .
He also complained that not enough notice was given on the hearing , since the bill was introduced only last Monday .
A House committee which heard his local option proposal is expected to give it a favorable report , although the resolution faces hard sledding later .
The House passed finally , and sent to the Senate , a bill extending the State Health Department 's authority to give planning assistance to cities .
Natural gas public utility companies would be given the right of eminent domain , under a bill by Sen. Frank Owen /3 , of El Paso , to acquire sites for underground storage reservoirs for gas .
Opponents generally argued that the ballot could n't give enough information about tax proposals for the voters to make an intelligent choice .
A two run homer by Norm Siebern and a solo blast by Bill Tuttle tied the game , and single runs in the eighth and ninth gave the Athletics their fifth victory in eight starts .
The principal tactic in controlling the ball was giving it to Abner Haynes , the flashy halfback .
Texas ' 545 - yard spree against Washington State gave the Longhorns a 3 - game total offense of 1512 yards ( 1065 rushing and 447 passing ) a new SWC high .
He has given only the one pass in his 27 innings , an unusual characteristic for a southpaw .
Billy Gardner 's line double , which just eluded the diving Minnie Minoso in left field , drove in Jim Lemon with the winning run with two out in the last of the ninth to give the Minnesota Twins a 6 - 5 victory over the Chicago White Sox Monday .
Jim Landis ' 380 - foot home run over left in the first inning gave the Sox a 1 - 0 lead , but Harmon Killebrew came back in the bottom of the first with his second homer in two days with the walking Bob Allison aboard .
Skorich was considered the logical choice after the club gave Norm Van Brocklin permission to seek the head coaching job with the Minnesota Vikings , the newest National Football League entry .
Tonight at 8 o'clock the Cardinals , who gave the Pirates as much trouble as anyone did in 1960 , breaking even with them , will get their first 1961 shot at baseball 's world champions .
The desire to give Broglio as many starts as possible ; 3 .
In addition , a special award was given to Bob ( Bevo ) Nordmann , the 6 - foot - 10 center who missed much of the season because of a knee injury .
On the clock given him was the inscription , `` For Outstanding Contribution to Billiken Basketball , 1960 - 61 '' .
If it 's true that contented cows give more milk , why should n't happy ball players produce more base hits ?
And what leadership a proud Mantle has given so far .
Two poets are paired on each record , in the order given above .
One of the roughest was the TV quiz shows , which gave him inferiority complexes .
This time the orchestra gave him some superb support fired by response to his own high mood .
Something had to give .
Though his character is broader and more comically rounded than the don , he gives it a firmness and toughness - a sort of peasant dignity - too .
If so , it might be worth while to assign a future jazz show to a different department - one with enough confidence in the musical material to cut down on the number of performers and give them a little room to display their talents .
About that same time John Crosby 's TV series on the popular arts proved again that giving jazz ample breathing space is one of the most sensible things a producer can do .
His bel canto style gave the performance a special distinction .
The party at Floyd 's penthouse gave the `` chorines '' a chance for a nostalgic frolic through all those hackneyed routines which have become a classic choreographic statement of the era 's nonsense .
The answers the girls give struck me as reasonably varied and healthily individual .
If one asks about this play , what it is that comes upon this community and works within it with such terrible power , there is no better answer to give than `` spirit '' .
Apart from spirit there could be no community , for it is spirit which draws men into community and gives to any community its unity , cohesiveness , and permanence .
It is spirit which gives life to a community and causes it to cohere .
It will be recalled from the discussion in Section 7 that the position of the `` right '' , as represented by Barth , rests on the following thesis : The only tenable alternative to Bultmann 's position is a theology that ( 1 ) rejects or at least qualifies his unconditioned demand for demythologization and existential interpretation ; ( 2 ) accepts instead a special biblical hermeneutics or method of interpretation ; and ( 3 ) in so doing , frees itself to give appropriate emphasis to the event Jesus Christ by means of statements that , from Bultmann 's point of view , are mythological .
The article proceeded to give an inaccurate account of a catholic plot to kill King James /1 1 , .
Further evidence that Roman Catholicism enjoys a more favorable position today than in 1861 is the respectful attention given to it in the mass media of England .
`` So that the man should not have thoughts of grandeur , and become lifted up , as if he had no lord , because of the dominion that had been given to him , and the freedom , fall into sin against God his Creator , overstepping his bounds , and take up an attitude of self-conceited arrogance towards God , a law was given him by God , that he might know that he had for lord the lord of all .
This gives a wide flare to the pecs , causing them to flow dramatically upward into deltoids and dramatically downward into the serratus and lats .
They stick to their principles , insist upon their due , but grow and bloom with dependable regularity if given it .
Then they were given 1 2 to 1 - 1 2 avocados per day as a substitute for part of their dietary fat consumption .
Moreover , the piece is written in five movements , rather than the conventional four of most quintets , and this gives the opus a serenade or divertimento flavor .
Some renditions are of symphonic dimensions , with the contrabass given free rein .
The Hephzibah Menuhin-Amadeus Quartet ( Angel ) and Victor Babin-Festival Quartet ( RCA Victor ) editions give us superlative string playing ( both in symphonic style ) crippled by unimaginative piano playing .
Helmut Roloff , playing with a group of musicians from the Bayreuth Ensemble , gives a sturdy reading , in much the same vein as that of the last mentioned pianists .
On the basis of what they give us we can know how the young Caruso sang , appreciate the distinctive qualities of Parsifal under Karl Muck 's baton , or sense the type of ensemble Toscanini created in his years with the New York Philharmonic .
This gives you a better opportunity to get the feel of the climate conditions , the exposure to the sun and wind , the water interests , etcetera , which vary greatly with the seasons .
Dr. H. V. Hilprecht , Professor of Assyrian at the University of Pennsylvania , dreamed that a Babylonian priest , associated with the king Kurigalzu , ( 1300 B.C. . ) escorted him to the treasure chamber of the temple of Bel , gave him six novel points of information about a certain broken relic , and corrected an error in its identification .
We may conclude that all six points of information , ostensibly given by the dream priest , could have been furnished by Dr. Hilprecht 's subconscious reasoning .
For Mrs. Shaefer - who had been given a clean bill of health by her own physician at the time she visited Lee - and her friend were agents for the California Pure Food and Drug Inspection Bureau .
Sarah Gross found that the treatments given her for a nervous ailment by the masseur were not helping her .
And so well is such ignorance preserved by the amateur and the money-maker that even at the college level most of the hundred odd folklore courses given in the United States survive on sentiment and nationalism alone .
Each film consisted of fifty feet , which gives a running time of about one minute on the screen .
In response , the industry allowed the discovery of the motion picture as a form of fiction and thus gave the movies the essential form they have had to this day .
In fact it has caused us to give serious thought to moving our residence south , because it is not easy for the most objective Southerner to sit calmly by when his host is telling a roomful of people that the only way to deal with Southerners who oppose integration is to send in troops and shoot the bastards down .
For the family is the simplest example of just such a unit , composed of people , which gives us both some immunity from , and a way of dealing with , other people .
The major effect of these advances appears to lie in the part they have played in the industrial revolution and in the tools which scientific understanding has given us to build and manipulate a more protective environment .
There is no more `` plot '' than that ; only slightly more , perhaps , than a newspaper account of such an incident would give .
Life is further characterized , in antithesis to Piepsam , as animal : the image of a dog , which appears at several places , is first given as the criterion of amiable , irrelevant interest aroused by life considered simply as a spectacle : a dog in a wagon is `` admirable '' , `` a pleasure to contemplate '' ; another wagon has no dog , and therefore is `` devoid of interest '' .
Advice is given also on problems of plant location and plant space .
Observations of the radio emission of a planet which has an extensive atmosphere will probe the atmosphere to a greater extent than those using shorter wave lengths and should in some cases give otherwise unobtainable information about the characteristics of the solid surface .
The total heat flux from the porous plug into the plug holder is thereby **f The temperature distribution of figure 4 gives **f for all blowing rates , assuming **f .
This gives a rate of shear of * * f .
Figure 3 shows the data on a silicone fluid , labeled 12500 cps which gave a high positive normal pressure .
The two fluids which gave the small negative pressures were polybutenes with molecular weights which were stated to be 520 and 300 .
They also give information which will aid in the design of a more satisfactory instrument for the measurement of the normal pressures .
This gives * * f , which is the pressure .
According to Philippoff , the recoverable shear s is given by * * f where |c is the angle of extinction .
The direction of the tension of minimum pressure is , of course , given by the direction of the major axis of the ellipsoids .
This formula is given by Rumscheidt and Mason .
Measurements on the photograph in this paper give * * f at the maximum rate of shear of * * f .
If it is assumed that the formula given by Lodge of * * f , cosec 2lc applies , the pressure difference along the major axes can be calculated from the angle of inclination of the major axis , and from this the interfacial tension can be calculated .
Chromium analysis gave 58.8 % Cr as compared with 61.2 % theory .
Polyphosphates gave renewed life to soap products at a time when surfactants were a threat though expensive , and these same polyphosphates spelled the decline of soap usage when the synergism between polyphosphates and synthetic detergent actives was recognized and exploited .
No matter how they are formulated , a large number of organic actives are simply not suitable for this application , since they do not give adequate soil removal .
Also given are several laboratory wash procedures in general use .
The purpose of washing is , obviously , to remove soils which are arbitrarily classed in the four major categories given below :
Stains , which include the wide variety of nonparticulate materials which give color even when present in very low concentration on the soiled object .
( 2 ) In the critical micelle region , there is a rapid agglomeration or polymerization to give the micelles , which have a degree of polymerization averaging around 60 - 80 .
From the equilibrium sorption data which are available , it seems logical to expect that polyphosphate ions would be strongly sorbed on the surface of the dirt ( especially clay soils ) so as to give it a greatly increased negative charge .
Sets of reaction tubes containing 0.2 of an atmosphere of added oxygen in one case and added moisture in another , both gave reaction rates in the range of 0.1 to 0.4 of the chlorine exchanged per hour .
Data on such comparisons together with data on the effect of light intensity are given in Table /1 .
These vehicles , with large sensitive areas , have collected data for long enough times to give reliable impact rates for the periods of exposure .
Preliminary data from 1959 Eta give an average impact rate of * * f for masses larger than * * f for about 1000 events in a 22 - day period ( LaGow and Alexander , 1960 ) .
However , the conversion from mass to size is unreliable , since many photographic meteors give evidence of a fluffy , loosely bound meteorite structure with densities as low as * * f .
Zodiacal light and the gegenschein give some evidence for such a dust blanket , a phenomenon also to be expected if the dust before capture is in circular orbits about the sun , as indicated by the trend of the smaller visible meteors .
A summary of meteorite data , prepared by Whipple ( 1958 ) on the basis of photographic , visual , and radar evidence , is given in Table 5 - 1 .
The unshielded flux is given in the last column ; these figures constitute the best estimate for the flux in interplanetary space near the Earth .
Of course , if there is a dust blanket around the Earth , the fluxes in interplanetary space should be less than the figures given here .
The dosages in the three levels of the vertical profile were : * * f This was not , of course , enough sampling to give a satisfactory description of the vertical diffusion of the aerosol .
Botulinal toxin , for example , is several thousand-fold more toxic by this route than when given per os .
this is why this approach to BW defense has not been given major attention .
Because negative pressure dialysis gave better recovery of proteins , permitted detection of proteins concentrated from very dilute solutions and was a gentler procedure , it was used in all but the earliest experiments .
Other herpetologists have ascertained that in the northern United States the prairie rattlesnake may not give first birth until it is four or even five years old , and that the young may be born every other year , rather than annually .
His thirteenth chapter includes many exciting accounts of huge serpents with prodigious strength , but these seem to be given to complete his picture , not to be believed .
Detailed information on record lengths of the giants is given in the section that follows .
Lawrence E . Griffin gives measurements of nineteen young anacondas , presumably members of a brood , from `` South America '' ; the extreme measurements of these fall between the lower limit of the Brookfield brood and its average .
R . R . Mole and F . W . Urich give approximately 20 inches as the average length of a brood of thirty from the region of the Orinoco estuaries .
Any of the antithyroid drugs , of either type , if given in large enough doses for a long period of time will cause goitre , owing to inhibition of thyroid hormone synthesis , with production of hypothyroidism .
The name thyroid-stimulating hormone ( TSH ) has been given to a substance found in the anterior pituitary gland of all species of animal so far tested for its presence .
In 1953 the patient developed an unexplained anemia for which 15 blood transfusions were given over a period of 4 years .
In spite of normal thyroid function tests , a trial of propylthiouracil , 400 mg. daily for one week , was given but served only to intensify muscle weakness .
The proteins were extracted with 3 volumes of * * f in * * f to give a nearly neutral extract and precipitated by 80 % saturation with * * f .
When 1 ml of conjugate was passed through a column ( * * f ) , the first and second milliliter fractions collected were the most specific and gave no nonspecific staining in some experiments , and very little in others .
In concluding this section , we should like to give an example which illustrates some of the ideas of the primary decomposition theorem .
We have chosen to give it at the end of the section since it deals with differential equations and thus is not purely linear algebra .
If T is a linear operator on an arbitrary vector space and if there is a monic polynomial p such that * * f , then parts ( a ) and ( b ) of Theorem 12 are valid for T with the proof which we gave .
We also give , for each property , an example where the property is absent .
The constancy of p and the independence are the conditions most likely to give trouble in practice .
Consider a simple , closed , plane curve C which is a real analytic image of the unit circle , and which is given by **f .
Here , for the case of squares inscribed in plane curves , we remove the restriction to convexity and give certain other results .
Related to this is the fact that most of the higher religions define for the individual his place in the universe and give him a feeling that he is relatively secure in an ordered , dependable universe .
At the same time that religion binds the individual helpfully to the supernatural and gives him cosmic peace and a sense of supreme fulfillment , it also has great therapeutic value for him .
It gives him aid , comfort , even solace , in meeting mundane life situations where his own unassisted practical knowledge and skill are felt by him to be inadequate .
Finally , it gives sanctity , more than human legitimacy , and even , through super empirical reference , transcendent and supernatural importance to some values ; for example , marriage as a sacrament , much law-breaking as sinful , occasionally the state as a divine instrument .
It gives social guidance and direction and makes for programs of social action .
Finally , it gives meaning to much social endeavor , and logic , consistency , and meaning to life .
In the absence of a reservoir of political consensus each organized political group hopes that the elections will give them new prominence , but in a system where there is as yet no place for the less prominent .
Both parties and the Ministry of the Interior were busily at work after the elections trying to unearth the political affiliations of the successful candidates and , thereby , give the elections a confidential but known degree of national political significance .
A goal was fixed , as given in Table 2 , and attention focused on its fulfillment .
The registration figures given in Table 2 must be interpreted with caution since the estimate for eligible electors were made without the benefit of a reliable census .
The answer the authors give to it , therefore , is of supreme importance .
He evidently could not actually see the corners of these objects , but their size and the dots gave them away .
And the authors give numerous instances of calculated guessing on the patient 's part to show how large a role it played in his process of readapting himself and how proficient he became at it .
They had had to work on very simple foundations and had not dared to give rein to impulses .
The officer demanded the names of the injured men ; the Mexicans not only refused to give them , but told the possemen if they wanted a fight they could have it .
It has given considerable trouble at times and empties right into the Battenkill .
This was working by the end of August and giving satisfactory service .
This conception was taken up by the early Church Fathers and by canon lawyers and theologians in the Middle Ages ; and More was far too well read not to have come across it in one or several of the forms thus given it .
Moreover , it is too readily forgotten that in the Republic what gave the initial impetus to Plato 's excursus into the construction of an imaginary commonwealth with its ruling-class communism of goods , wives , and children , was his quest for a canon for the proper ordering of the individual human psyche ; and it is to this problem that the Republic ultimately returns .
When we give the necessities of life to the poor , we restore to them what is already theirs .
On Wednesday evening , November 23 , 1859 , in Warren , Rev. Mark Trafton of New Bedford , gave a `` Mission of Sympathy '' lecture in which he favorably viewed the Harper 's Ferry insurrection .
The Providence Daily Journal , however , stated that Brown 's courage , bravery , and heroism `` in a good cause would make a man a martyr ; it gives something of dignity even to a bad one '' .
The truck and the car gave the manufacturer a new degree of freedom in selecting his plant site .
They indicated that a 4 - day retention , aerated lagoon would give 60 to 76 per cent BOD reduction .
The data given in Table 2 , show the routine operation of the aerator .
The rate of oxygen transfer at 1.0 - mg / l dissolved oxygen concentration and 10 ` C for various rotor speeds is given in Table 3 , .
The BOD data are given in Table 4 , .
The daily sewage volume to the oxidation pond averaged 147000 gpd , giving a retention period of 42 days .
Since Mr. McKinley had to give a lecture , Rachel and Scotty drove home alone in the Plymouth .
Prevot had said that the searchlights would be bounced off the clouds at 2230 hours , `` which gives us time to get settled in position '' .
Boxell looked at Lawrence with a searching glance , the kind that a prosecuting attorney would give a man on trial .
It would not give .
Therefore , give Him your affection and store up His love for you .
To Voltaire 's surprise , however , their host gives them fresh clothes to put on , opens his purse to lend them money and sits them down before a good dinner .
Such was the impromptu that Voltaire gave to howls of laughter at Sans Souci and that was soon circulated in manuscript throughout the literary circles of Europe , to be printed sometime later , but with the name of Timon of Athens , the famous misanthrope , substituted for that of Rousseau .
But then , after the little operetta had been given its feeble amateur rendering , everyone insisted that it was too good to be lost forever , and that the Royal Academy of Music must now have the manuscript in order to give it the really first-rate performance it merited .
As for this rider , I never saw him before or afterwards and never saw him dismounted , so whether he stood tall or short in his shoes , I can n't say ; but I do know that he gave the day tone and distinction .
He is throttling the liberty my father gave his life to win '' !
The canons , in a body , had tried to force him on his deathbed to let them give him the last rites of the Church , but he had died still proclaiming salvation by faith .
Unless God expected a man to believe the Holy Scriptures , why had He given them to him ?
The city had recently given him a small salary , but it was not enough to supply even necessities .
`` Monsieur Favre indicated that if I would co-operate , after you and William are banished , following the debate , I will be given a place of influence '' .
It gave the rubberized fabric a dull gleam , like metal .
`` Done give Ole Buckra all his money '' ?
And look what he done give us '' .
Some liar 's logic , a wisp of optimism as fragile as the scent of tropical blossoms that came through the window ( a euphoria perhaps engendered by the pill Fritzie had given her ) , consoled her for a moment .
Amy had to be safe , had to come back to them - if only to reap that share of life 's experiences that were her due , if only to give her parents another chance to do better by her .
Once , Andrus walked by it , hastily scanned the bold black headline and the five column lead of the article ( by Duane Bosch , staff correspondent - age not given ) , and muttered : `` We a buncha national celebrities '' .
They went shopping in the neighborhood , and bought two loaves of bread with the ration coupons they had been given in Blois , and some cheese , and a dozen eggs , and a bag of oranges from a peddler in the Place Redoute - the first oranges they had seen since they landed .
No fold could be accidental , each turn of the drapery had to serve organically , to cover the Madonna 's slender legs and feet so that they would give substantive support to Christ 's body , to intensify her inner turmoil .
That is why our creative people give their time to literature , not to painting or sculpture '' .
He hesitated for a moment when Michelangelo asked him to disrobe , so Michelangelo gave him a piece of toweling to wrap around his loins , led him to the kitchen to take off his clothes .
his quill drawings had a scratchiness , suggesting skin texture ; the clay he used plastically to suggest soft moving flesh , as in an abdomen , in a reclining torso ; the wax he smoothed over to give the body surface an elastic pull .
`` Hush '' , said Uncle Randolph , smiling , `` or I 'll give you another black eye '' .
And the old man had given a sly and wicked laugh and said , `` Hell , yes !
She gave the nastiest laugh I ever heard .
Of course I had to give her Eileen 's address , but she never came near us .
Occasionally if I pushed him too far he 'd give me a look out of narrowed eyes and the hard cruel bony skull would show through that smooth face of his .
No matter how devoted a man was , no matter how fully he gave his life to the Lord , he could never extinguish that one spark of pride that gave him definition as an individual .
His arm had been giving him some trouble and Rector was not enough of a medical expert to determine whether it had healed improperly or whether Hino was simply rebelling against the tedious work in the print shop , using the stiffness in his arm as an excuse .
He was allowed to spend his nights at an inn near the hospital and he was given some extra money to go to the pachinko parlor - an excellent place to make contact with the enemy .
He left with all the joyous spirit of a child going on a holiday , nodding attentively as Rector gave him his final instructions .
When he had given the call a few moments thought , he went into the kitchen to ask Mrs. Yamata to prepare tea and sushi for the visitors , using the formal English china and the silver tea service which had been donated to the mission , then he went outside to inspect the grounds .
At two thirty he sent Fujimoto to the top of the wall at the northeast corner of the mission to keep an eye on the ridge road and give a signal when he first glimpsed the approach of Kayabashi 's party .
At the same time another child - this one of Shelley 's brain - was given to the world : Alastor , a poem of pervading beauty in which the reader may gaze into the still depths of a fine mind 's musings .
For the moment there was no woman in his life , and it was this vacuum that had given Claire her opportunity .
Watson had given his name and asked for a safe-conduct pass .
Offer her a cup of tea and she would say , `` Why , these cups look just like a set I gave to the Salvation Army last year '' .
Mrs. Pastern had been given sixteen names , a bundle of literature , and a printed book of receipts .
`` Nobody does , but they gave me ten last year '' .
He was happy enough to take the convertible and race up the hill to the Blevins ' , thinking that they might give him a drink .
But the Blevins were away ; their maid gave him an envelope with a check in it and shut the door .
Planes made her feel faint , and in Tokyo , where she had gone that summer , she had been given raw fish for breakfast and so she had come straight home .
To Mark : `` Please give my regards to Myra '' .
It seemed to her , as it seemed each night , that the gloom drew itself in and became densest at the table 's empty chairs , giving her the frequent illusion that she dined with shadows .
He gave Abel a quick glance and moved closer to the wheel , hugging it to him , and Abel caught this briefest of allusions to guilt .
Now Hans had given Ma something of his - we both had when we thought she was going straight to Pa - something valuable ; but since she did n't know we 'd given it to her , there was no easy way of getting it back .
`` I 'd give anything if I could have found a girl like you '' .
But after the doctor 's return that night Alex could see , from the high window in his own room , the now familiar figure crouched on a truly impressive heap of towels , apparently giving its egg hatching powers one final chance before it was replaced in its office by a sure-enough hen .
He gave Mr. Jack a real going over ; he brushed his shoulders and his back and his collar with long , firm strokes .
`` Good-by , Winston '' , Mr. Jack said , giving a final set to his hat .
`` I 'll give you a medical certificate , framed , if you like '' , Miss Ada had said .
But that year was different , for just as the city , in the form of my street clothes , had intruded upon my mountain nights , so an essential part of the summer gave promise of continuing into the fall : Jessica and I , about to be separated not by a mere footbridge or mess-hall kitchen but by the immense obstacle of residing in cruelly distant boroughs , had agreed to correspond .
Having received permission to give a camp reunion Halloween party , she asked that I come and be her date .
Her optimism gave me heart .
Hatless , in an overcoat of rough blue wool , I was given a proud farewell by my mother and father , and I set out into the strangely still streets of Brooklyn .
That , incidentally , might give you some idea of what Felix was like .
We waited till he had finished laughing , and that gave us a few moments for taking stock of him .
Could your future , your immediate future , be made to include taking us upstairs , giving us a bit of space in which our friend can work , and making available to him your finger tips '' ?
He could not manage the former or expect the latter ; they had nothing to give to each other .
If Rock shows up during the number - or you hear anything - give me the signal '' .
The word `` church '' which turned up over and over again among Jubal 's words gave him knotty difficulty ; there was no Martian concept to match it - unless one took `` church '' and `` worship '' and `` God '' and `` congregation '' and many other words and equated them to the totality of the only world he had known during growing waiting & & & then forced the concept back into English in that phrase which had been rejected ( by each differently ) by Jubal , by Mahmoud , by Digby .
And , if a man is married , he will automatically be given a divorce '' .
Mary was free to marry again , not knowing that the Sturch had secretly given her a divorce , thinking that death had dissolved her marriage .
But youth asked nothing of its parents - not a touch of the hand or a kiss given in passing .
She gave herself fancy airs !
If you are thinking of giving him a berth , be sure to make it a wide one '' .
`` I seem to remember '' , he said , `` that in an interview ten years ago you gave humor and comedy five years to live .
An unusual , if not extraordinary , rendering of the classic myth that involves the rescue of Prometheus from the rock by the U.S. Cavalry was given last week in the warehouse of the Albany Leather Conduit Company amid cheers of `` Hubba hubba '' and `` Yalagaloo pip pip '' !
As he leads the Neurenschatz Skolkau Orchestra , Schlek gives a tremendously inspired performance of both the Baslot and Rattzhenfuut concertos , including the controversial Tschilwyk cadenza , which was included at the conductor 's insistence .
It is , I am reliably given to understand , the technical argot for those who engage in your particular branch of the boost ; i.e. , burglars who rob while the tenants are absent , in contrast to hot slough prowlers , those who work while the occupants are home .
His life-long friend , Serge Koussevitzky , gave unreservedly of his praise and brilliant performances in Boston , New York , and Washington , D. C. , to which he added broadcastings and recordings for the whole nation .
Except for a rich friendship with the painter , Chauncey Ryder who gave him the only professional instruction he ever had - and this was limited to a few lessons , though the two artists often went on painting trips together - Roy developed his art by himself .
A group of researchers at the University of Washington have given a paper which briefly outlines some of these techniques .
Have you assessed the importance of service and given it proper attention ?
If companies will take the time to give objective consideration to their major problems and to the questions they provoke , then a long constructive step will have been taken toward more effective marketing in next decade .
M + R Dietetic Laboratories , Inc. , Columbus , gives all its workers a facsimile checkbook - each check showing the amount the company spends on a particular fringe .
It 's usually not too hard to sell workers on this as it gives them longer holiday periods .
Our society has `` emancipated '' the woman , giving her new independence and new authority .
Circumstances gave her almost undisputed sway over child rearing , money handling and home maintenance .
She liked this taste of authority and independence , and , with darkness , was not likely to give it up .
It gives them room to play and plenty of fresh air .
Part-time farming gives a measure of security if the regular job is lost , provided the farm is owned free of debt and furnishes enough income to meet fixed expenses and minimum living costs .
Everyone with a personal or group tragedy to relate had to be given his day in court as in some vast collective dirge .
Not enough to do away with all doubts , but sufficient to give a fairly accurate picture of the events of the voyage .
In 1609 , the Dutch East India Company hired Hudson , gave him two learned geographers , fitted him out with a ship called the Half Moon , and supplied him with Dutch sailors .
On the second voyage , he had turned back at the frozen island of Novaya Zemlya and meekly given the crew a certificate stating that he did so of his own free will - which was obviously not the case .
One man remarked that if he had a hundred pounds , he would give ninety of them to be back in England .
Up spoke carpenter Staffe , who said he would n't give ten pounds to be home .
A Yankee sergeant gave the following description of his sweetheart : `` My girl is none of your one-horse girls .
When you see them again give them my love - not best respects now , but love by God '' .
A Georgia soldier gave his wife the following description of the cause and consequence of diarrhoea : `` I have bin a little sick with diorah two or three days .
Scarcity of paper caused many Southerners to adopt the practice of cross writing , i. e. , after writing from left to right of the page in the usual manner , they gave the sheet a half turn and wrote from end to end across the lines previously written .
When , as a diplomatic gesture of amity and in payment for the loan of gunmen in the April election , Torrio had given O ' Banion a slice of Cicero , the profits from that district had been $ 20000 a month .
In the villages people lined up to give us flowers .
`` Being Jewish gives you tremendous drive '' , a boy remarked .
Members of higher and lower social status often cluster around this nucleus , so that Protestant figures on social class give the impression of spread over all social classes ; but this is deceptive , for the core of membership is concentrated in a single social and economic stratum .
More than creatures of metropolitan forces , the churches have taken the lead in counteracting the interdependence of metropolitan life , crystallizing and perpetuating the stratification of peoples , giving form to the struggle for social homogeneity in a world of heterogeneous peoples .
Attention will be given in the next chapter to the style of association in the denominational churches ; this style is characteristically an expression of the communal style of the middle classes .
These values give direction to the life of the middle-class man or woman , dictating the methods of child rearing , determining the pattern of community participation , setting the style for the psychiatric treatment of middle-class illness , and informing the congregational life of the major denominations .
He seems , by some unconscious division of labor , to have given them that one function and no other , leaving communication to the rest of the face .
Take Augustine 's doctrine of grace given and grace withheld : have you pondered the dramatic qualities in this theology ?
He wanted to know if my father had beaten me or my mother had run away from home to give me an unhappy childhood .
And although these insights into the nature of art may be in themselves insufficient for a thoroughgoing philosophy of art , their peculiar authenticity in this day and age requires that they be taken seriously and gives promise that from their very substance , new and valid chapters in the philosophy of art may be written .
The Poetics , in affirming that all human arts are `` modes of imitation '' , gives a more serious role to artistic mimesis than did Plato .
Whitehead contends that the human way of understanding existence as a unity of interlocking and interdependent processes which constitute each other and which cause each other to be and not to be is possible only because the basic form of such an understanding , for all its vagueness and tendency to mistake the detail , is initially given in the way man feels the world .
To guard against the tyranny of a numerical majority , Calhoun developed his theory of `` concurrent majority '' , which , he said , `` by giving to each portion of the community which may be unequally affected by the action of government , a negative on the others , prevents all partial or local legislation '' .
Lincoln understood this better than most when he said in his `` Second Inaugural '' that God `` gives to both North and South this terrible war , as the woe due to those by whom the offense came '' .
He gives us an account of this in his lively and humorous poem , `` The Happy Artists '' .
Not only did the ideal entrepreneur not produce the greatest good for the greatest number , he ended by destroying himself , by giving birth to monopoly capitalism .
Location theorists have given these matters much consideration .
The number of people acting as one body by this scheme gives a surprisingly large army of * * f 55987 men .
Yet , after Rousseau had given the social contract a new twist with his notion of the General Will , the same philosophy , it may be said , became the idea source of the French Revolution also .
And I select this sentence as its pertinent summation : `` In essence the drama of his ( Eisenhower 's ) Presidency can be described as the ordeal of a nation turned conservative and struggling - thus far with but limited and precarious success - to give effective voice and force to that conservatism '' .
Though , to be sure , we gave Kennedy no very positive approval in the margin of his preferment .
They , perhaps , gave the pitch of their position in the preface where it was said that Eisenhower requested that the Commission be administered by the American Assembly of Columbia University , because it was non-partisan .
And let me add Murray 's new book as another symptom of it , particularly so in view of the attention Time magazine gave it when it came out recently .
Ralph Gabriel gave it the name of Protestant philosophy of Progress .
The biggest loss , of course , was the individual 's lessened desire and ability to give his services to the growth of his company and our economy .
They give strict interpretation to William James ' statement that `` Every idea that enters the mind tends to express itself '' .
Hence , the only defensible procedure is to repress any and every notion , unless it gives evidence that it is perfectly safe .
Shakespeare gives us a vivid picture of Shylock , but probably he never saw a Jew , unless in some of his travels .
Studying The Merchant of Venice in high school and college has given many young people their notions about Jews .
Frequently we are given assurance that automatically all ideas will be sifted and resifted and in the end only the good ones will survive .
Debate rid us of McCarthy but did not give us much that is positive .
Such characters , with their low existence and often low morality , produce humorous effects in his novels and tales , as they did in the writing of Longstreet and Hooper and Harris , but it need not be added that he gives them far subtler and more intricate functions than they had in the earlier writers ; nor is there need to add that among them are some of the most highly individualized and most successful of his characters .
By her eighteenth birthday her bent for writing was so evident that Papa and Mamma gave her a Life of Dickens as a spur to her aspiration .
In the following year her father undertook to give a course in Hebrew theology to Johns Hopkins students , and this brought to the Szold house a group of bright young Jews who had come to Baltimore to study , and who enjoyed being fed and mothered by Mamma and entertained by Henrietta and Rachel , who played and sang for them in the upstairs sitting room on Sunday evenings .
Though they would produce some very memorable and lasting songs , Arlen and Mercer were not given strong material to work on .
`` We 'd give him things to deliver , letters , checks , deeds and things like that '' , remembers his half-brother Walter , still in the real estate business in savannah , `` and learn days later that he 'd absent-mindedly stuffed them into his pocket .
Literature may be said to give people a sense of purpose , dedication , mission , significance .
This , no doubt , is part of what Gilbert Seldes implies when he says of the arts , `` They give form and meaning to life which might otherwise seem shapeless and without sense '' .
How literature does this , or for whom , is certainly not clear , but the content , form , and language of the `` message '' , as well as the source , would all play differentiated parts in giving and molding a sense of purpose .
A third idea is that artistic literature serves to reduce emotional conflicts , giving a sense of serenity and calm to individuals .
This is given some expression in Beardsley 's notion of harmony and the resolution of indecision .
I would say , too , that the study of literature tends to give a person what I shall call depth .
This work gave a heat of formation of aluminum fluoride which closely substantiates a value which had been determined by a less direct method , and raises this property to 15 percent above that accepted a few years ago .
Dr. A. V. Astin , NBS Director , opened the 5 - day session with introductory remarks , following which a total of twenty-six papers were given throughout the week by NBS scientists , from both the Washington and Boulder Laboratories .
The New York Central has pointed out that this control , if approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission , would give the combined C.+O. - B.+O. Railroad a total of 185 points served in common with the New York Central .
Not only is this kind of duplication wasteful , but it gives the combined system the ability to take freight traffic away from the New York Central and other railroads serving the area .
Obviously , the Interstate Commerce Commission will not force the New York Central to further curtail its commuter operations by giving undue competitive advantages to the lines that wish to merge .
Solid blocks are recommended because hollow blocks would have to be filled with concrete to give effective protection .
If they are used , the walls and roof should be 10 inches thick to give the same protection as the 8 - inch solid concrete blocks .
Another type of shelter which gives excellent fallout protection can be built as an added room to the basement of a home under construction .
The sole guidance given the Court for discharging the task committed to it was this : `` The judgment must therefore be reversed and the cause remanded to the District Court for a determination , after further hearing , of the equitable relief necessary and appropriate in the public interest to eliminate the effects of the acquisition offensive to the statute .
Petitioner first contends that the Department denied him procedural due process by not giving him timely opportunity , before its final recommendation to the appeal board , to answer the statement of the local board as to his claim of devoting 100 hours to actual preaching .
We said there that it was necessary `` that a registrant be given an opportunity to rebut [ the Department 's ] recommendation when it comes to the Appeal Board , the agency with the ultimate responsibility for classification '' .
It is not essentially different from a memorandum of an attorney in the Department of Justice , of which the Attorney General receives many , and to which he may give his approval or rejection .
He knows that he must give the expert his place , but he knows that he must also keep him in it .
For purposes of sample selection only ( individual tests were given later ) we obtained group test scores of reading achievement and intelligence from school records of the entire third grade population in each school system .
Children scoring high in compulsivity were those who gave evidence of tension or emotionality in situations where there was lack of organization or conformity to standards and expectations , or who made exaggerated efforts to achieve these goals .
Let us now put some flesh on the theoretical bones we have assembled by giving illustrations of roleplaying used for evaluation and analysis .
Another case may be given in illustration of a successful use of analysis , and also of the employment of a procedure for intensive analysis .
This behavior is more `` veridical '' - or true than other testing behavior for some types of evaluation , and so can give quick and accurate estimates of complex functioning .
A hebephrenic man used to give a repetitious wave of his hand a number of times during his largely silent hours with his therapist .
Of all the possible forms of nonverbal expression , that which seems best to give release , and communicational expression , to complex and undifferentiated feelings is laughter .
It is no coincidence that the hebephrenic patient , the most severely dedifferentiated of all schizophrenic patients , shows , as one of his characteristic symptoms , laughter - laughter which now makes one feel scorned or hated , which now makes one feel like weeping , or which now gives one a glimpse of the bleak and empty expanse of man 's despair ; and which , more often than all these , conveys a welter of feelings which could in no way be conveyed by any number of words , words which are so unlike this welter in being formed and discrete from one another .
A more detailed description of dictionary operations - text lookup and dictionary modification - give a clearer picture .
The formula for computing random addresses from the form of each occurrence will not give a distinct address for each distinct form .
Dominant stress is of course more than extended duration , and normally centers on syllables that would have primary stress or phrase stress if the words or longer units they are parts of were spoken alone : a dominant stress given to glorify would normally center on its first syllable rather than its last .
They will give suggestions that can be worked up into field procedures .
Most others have been content to give only the most general attention to the broadest and most obvious features of the phonology when designing orthographies .
I hope his suggestions are given the consideration they deserve in Kikuyu circles .
When now we count the frequency of the 71 items in the two language families appearing in the same column or grade , or one column or grade apart , or two or three or four , we find these differences : * * f This distribution can be summarized by averaging the distance in grades apart : * * f ; which , divided by * * f gives a mean of 1.07 grades apart .
They isolate out easily , naturally , and unambiguously from the continuum of nature and existence ; and they should be given priority in the basic list as long as they continue to show these qualities .
His aptitudes and preferences could be given more weight in selecting the proper training .
Angelo gave him an affectionate smile .
She 'd be smart about it , get him to give it to her in little bills so 's nobody would suspect - maybe could n't get it until Monday account of that , the banks - But that was n't really long to wait .
`` You 've give me the wrong change '' , said the customer sharply .
`` A lot of people are so peculiar that they do n't like cats , it 's not the easiest thing in the world to find good homes for kittens - and , damn it , you know very well if I have them around long , impossible to give them away !
She opened it an inch and poked out the keys for me to give you .
Rev would never have tried to give her poison !
Glendora gave a gulp .
She wanted to be with him , to give him the comfort and companionship she knew he needed .
Without warning , without giving her a chance to prepare for it .
But one day , she expected , he would somehow discover , without her having to tell him , that there was such a woman in the world ; a woman who was willing to give him love , faith , and anything else a woman could give a husband .
Indeed , there was a woman who , unasked , had already given him love .
The old man gave the room a stare in leaving ; under the scraggly brows the pale old eyes burned with a bitter memory .
Which probably would turn out to be true ; which he obviously had to be given the opportunity to say .
He would have to be given the opportunity .
`` They won n't talk about who gave the information .
Gun knew that nothing but aces back to back would give the lieutenant an ulcer and a smile at the same time .
Not that he gave a damn what the grapevine sent out about Killpath 's little speech on the comportment of platoon commanders .
`` I 'll have to give it some thought '' , he said .
A few passed along a tip for the simple reason that they liked him and wanted to give him a break .
And his relatively small hands and feet gave him an almost delicate appearance .
McBride gave him his opportunity when he showed up in town with a pistol on his hip .
I 've given willful hurt to no man .
`` In my place , you 'd follow such advice as you give me '' ?
He held out a moment longer , then his nerve gave under the pressure .
Tom Horn was soon back at work , giving his secret employers their money 's worth .
That long ride the four of you took must 've given him a good appetite .
Apparently sensing this , and realizing that it gave him an advantage , Jess became bold .
It gave Curt time to stagger to his feet .
`` If you spot Carmer give a yell before you move in '' .
Russ gave him a brutal thrust that tumbled him over flat on his stomach .
`` You owe it to Penny to give her a chance to explain that she was defending you , really '' , he observed mildly .
`` Pat had never pretended to give advice in such affairs .
The control tower gave him immediate take-off permission , and the clean roar of the engine that took him off the rough strip spoke well of the skill of Donovan .
His present maximum altitude , up against the overcast , gave him the opportunity to exploit his advantages .
It gave them all a chance to make a high-speed climbing turn attack and a break-away that would not take them into the overcast or force a tight turn recovery .
The PM might show he drowned instead , but that 's what the once-over-lightly gives us .
He had picked out this pathless trail , instead of the common one , in a moment of romantic fancy , to give them privacy on their honeymoon .
His wife did n't give a sign she 'd heard .
He swung toward the front to give the news to Hettie , then stopped , barred from her by the vehemence of her blame and hate .
And it was clear that Adrien was not mistaken , for both Small and Cromwell took no step toward aiding in the sending up of the new topgallant mast till Philip Spencer had given the signal to obey .
When the mast was raised , Alexander gave the order for Small and Cromwell to be placed under arrest , and now three figures in irons sprawled upon the open deck and terror stalked the Somers .
And when he did , when he gave to his ship that protection necessary to preserve her honor , he knew he would lose forever the Navy to which he had dedicated his soul .
It was given or it was not given .
Another field had given him fame enough to satisfy any egotist .
Even if that 's all the promise he ever gave or ever will give , the giving of it once was enough and you believed it then and you will always believe it , even when it is finally the only thing in the world you have left to believe , and the whole world is telling you that one was a lie .
You wonder about the Christmas card with no name on it , and it comes to you that maybe it would have been better to have made somebody else happy if you could n't be happy yourself , to give somebody else the one they wanted - to give them you .
In the end , I did the same old picture , the naked girl and the guy in the doorway , only I put a Lord Byron shirt on the guy , gave him a sword instead of a pistol , and painted in furniture from the stills of a costume movie .
Like certain expensive restaurants , just sitting there gave you the illusion of being wealthy yourself .
I had studied with Burns ten years before , during the scholarship year the Manhattan gave me , along with the five-hundred dollar prize for my paintings of bums on Hudson Street .
The upshot of the evening was that I got the address of Pendleton 's studio - or rather , of the studio in which he gave his classes , for he did n't work there himself - and joined the life class , which met every Tuesday and Thursday from ten to twelve in the morning .
But Carla ; eyes were on Agnese whose glowing face and softening eyes gave her a look of warmth and happiness .
It gave him a chance to unload the stuff and get it down to the cellar without a barrage of acid comments .
Mr. Mills had done some figuring on a scrap of paper and given him the various kinds of boards and two-by-fours which , properly handled , would , he had assured him , turn into a workbench .
Wexler had charged the precinct judges in these cases with `` complementary '' miscount of the vote , in which votes would be taken from one candidate and given to another .
Halleck said the voluntary care plan enacted last year should be given a fair trial first .
The impression has nevertheless been given during these three days , despite Mr. Rusk 's personal popularity , that the United States delegation came to Oslo in a somewhat tentative and exploratory frame of mind , more ready to listen and learn than to enunciate firm policy on a global scale with detailed application to individual danger spots .
The Secretary of State himself , in his first speech , gave some idea of the tremendous march of events inside and outside the United States that has preoccupied the new administration in the past four months .
The annual spring meeting has given an impetus in three main directions : more , deeper , and more timely political consultation within the alliance , the use of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( when ratified ) as a method of coordinating aid to the underdeveloped countries , and the need for strengthening conventional forces as well as the maintenance of the nuclear deterrent .
This group pleads with the administration to `` give no further support for the invasion of Cuba by exile groups '' .
Foreign aid programs were revamped to give greater emphasis to economic aid and to encourage political reform in recipient nations .
But the Communists never gave sufficient provocation at any one time for the United States to want to risk a limited or an all-out war over Laos .
Sandman told the gathering that reports from workers on a local level all over the state indicate that Jones will be chosen the Republican Party 's nominee with the largest majority given a candidate in recent years .
But Mr. Buckley seems to have assumed he would be given the right to pick Mr. Gerosa 's successor .
One effect of the proposal , which puts a premium on population instead of economic strength , as in the past , would be to take jobs from European nations and give more to such countries as India .
The builtin headache of the Barnett regime thus far has been the steady stream of job-seekers and others who feel they were given commitments by Barnett at some stage of his eight-year quest for the governor 's office .
Passage of the sales tax measure would also give Davis the means to effect a transition .
The new year might see some house-cleaning , either genuine or token , depending upon developments , to give Davis an opportunity to combat some of these criticisms .
By leaving our doors open the United States gives other peoples the opportunity to see us and to compare , he said .
At the adoption , the Rev. T. F. Zimmerman , general superintendent , commented , `` The Assemblies of God has been a bulwark for fundamentalism in these modern days and has , without compromise , stood for the great truths of the Bible for which men in the past have been willing to give their lives '' .
The bride 's brother , Walter D. Monroe Jr. , will give her in marriage .
Harvey B. Stevens of Kenilworth will give his niece in marriage .
Mr. and Mrs. Stevens and the bride 's other uncles and aunts , the Rush C. Butlers , the Homer E. Robertsons , and the David Q. Porters , will give the bridal dinner tonight in the Stevenses ' home .
The international theme will be continued with the Balkan strings playing for a dinner the Byron Harveys will give in the Racquet club after the tea .
Everywhere he went in town , people sidled up , gave him the guttural bit or broke into a frightening Tarzan yodel .
Dr. W. B. I. Martin officiated , and the bride was given in marriage by her father .
The bride was given in marriage by her father .
Dan Beam presented music and the bride was given in marriage by her father .
The women have a reputation for giving parties that are different and are fun and this year 's promises to follow in this fine tradition .
But she does indicate festivities will start early , that a jazz combo will `` give with the Basin Street beat '' during the cocktail and dinner hours and that Lester Lanin 's orchestra will take over during the dancing .
The trial will be held , probably the first week of March , in the famous Old Bailey central criminal court where Klaus Fuchs , the naturalized British German born scientist who succeeded in giving American and British atomic bomb secrets to Russia and thereby changed world history during the 1950 s , was sentenced to 14 years in prison .
Fuchs , after nine and a half years , was released , being given time off for good behavior .
The navy captain disclosed also that a list of questions found in Miss Gee 's purse would , if completed and handed back , have given the Kremlin a complete picture `` of our current anti-submarine effort and would have shown what we are doing in research and development for the future '' .
Student Council officers announced today the Kowalski family would be given the combined proceeds from a school dance held two weeks ago , and another dance for Fuhrmann 's 770 students this Friday night .
The Georgia Constitution gives the Legislature the power to exempt colleges from property taxation if , among other criteria , `` all endowments to institutions established for white people shall be limited to white people , and all endowments to institutions established for colored people shall be limited to colored people '' .
The officers gave this account :
It is the only county in the state so far this month reporting a possible shortage in GA category , for which emergency allotment can be given by the state if necessary .
The conversion to magnetic tape is not yet completed , he said , and added Field 's long service in state government and welfare employ gave him familiarity with the welfare program .
The Junior Achievement program is designed to give teenagers practical experience in business by allowing them actually to form small companies , under the guidance and sponsorship of business firms .
Mr. Parrillo was given first aid at Johnston Hose 1 .
The work added eight beds to the hospital , giving it a total capacity of 646 general beds .
Mr. Sorrentino will be honored on the evening of Dec. 7 at a dinner to be given by the Aurora Club at the Sheraton-Biltmore Hotel .
U. S. Attorney Macon Weaver said the federal complaint , charged that the juror gave false information when asked about Ku Klux Klan membership during selection of jury .
The executive paid tribute to research and development and technology for their great contributions in the past , but he also cautioned industry that they tend to be great equalizers because they move at a fairly even pace within an industry and fail to give it the short-term advantage which it often needs .
This was the chief reason for a so-so sales outlook given by two-thirds of 56 builders polled by the National Housing Center .
Last year , we probably would have given him $ 700 for a comparable machine '' .
She gave a fine portrayal of Auntie Mame on Broadway in 1958 and has appeared in live television from `` Captain Brassbound 's Conversion '' to `` Camille '' .
Last October he gave a public speech in Washington , D. C. entitled `` Are Women Here to Stay '' ?
Rounded posts give a soft , sculptured look , paneled doors have decorative burl panels or cane insets plus softening arches , table tops are inlaid in Macassar ebony or acacia .
Four parties are given a year .
Mr. and Mrs. Joseph R. Bolker will give a dinner on Friday at their home in Beverly Hills to honor Mrs. Norman Chandler , chairman of the Music Center Building Fund Committee , and Mr. Chandler .
Mail orders are now being received for the series of concerts to be given this season under the auspices of the San Francisco Chamber Music Society .
Many of the music-loving members of the President 's staff gathered around the tent listening and watching the rapt attention given by the young seated audience .
In 45 minutes , the Gallery leaders had given the students a quick rundown on art from the Renaissance to the late 19 th Century .
He gives credit for the promotion to his new outlook on life .
It would give him an opportunity to take the measure of his chief adversary in the cold war , to try to probe Mr. Khrushchev 's intentions and to make clear his own views .
Mr. Kennedy told Moscow he would give his answer by May 20 after consultation with the Allies .
The feeling was that he would sense an inner core of toughness and determination in the President and that plain talk by Mr. Kennedy would give him pause .
The fact that the group orientation and group identification are founded on supernatural principles and nourished by the well-springs of devotion simply give them a deeper and more satisfying dimension .
There was sufficient pretext to demand Colmer 's ouster : he had given his lukewarm support to the anti-Kennedy electors in Mississippi .
He did seem hasty on his second and third shots , but then there was an agonizing wait of several minutes while Coe graciously putted out , giving Palmer a chance to recover his composure , which he had quite visibly lost .
Give me a team of nine angry men and I 'll give you a team of nine gentlemen and we 'll beat you nine out of ten times '' .
I could talk to you for three hours and still not be able to give you all of our plans '' !
But Shoup also gave the Corps a tilling in spots .
Last week , in the German city of Du ^ sseldorf , G. David Thompson was making headlines that could well give Pittsburgh pause .
He gave the impression of never having read a word about art , but there was no doubt that he had an eye for the best .
At 7 : 30 a. m. , more than three hours after landing , the Beardens gave an ultimatum :
Under this law annual grants are given to systems in substantial amounts .
All services are given without cost to members .
Newspapermen and politicians especially are aware of the penetrating attention and expert analysis the league gives to public affairs .
That such expansion can be obtained without a raise in taxes is due to growth of the tax digest and sound fiscal planning on the part of the board of commissioners , headed by Chairman Charles O. Emmerich who is demonstrating that the public trust he was given was well placed , and other county officials .
Though Walter Ulbricht , by grace of Soviet tanks , may be head man in East Germany , that does not give him any right to usurp the government of East Berlin or to absorb that semi-city into the Soviet zone .
The vote still gives citizens a voice in the operation of their government and their party .
Sam Rayburn took unnumbered secrets with him to the grave , for he was never loquacious , and his word , once given , was not subject to retraction .
Mass rapes , troop mutinies , uncontrolled looting and pillage and reckless military adventures , given no sanction by any political authority , have become almost daily occurrences .
It happens in the territory of the Leopoldville government , which is itself a fiction , demonstrably incapable of governing , and commanding only such limited credit abroad as UN support gives it .
He gave his life for his beliefs .
The people , in delegating authority , do not give their public servants the right to decide what is good for the people to know and what is not good for them to know .
Of course , some of the credit for the sale boost must be given to improvement in the weather and to the fact that Easter comes more than two weeks earlier than in 1960 .
The British government , concerned about the threat of unemployment in the shipbuilding industry , had put through a bill to give Cunard loans and grants totaling $ 50400000 toward the $ 84000000 cost of a new 75000 - ton passenger liner .
If they give him advice when he asks it , or if they perform specified duties under his direction , the nature of the U. N. will not of necessity change .
The widespread purge that has taken place the past twelve months or so among Communist leaders in the provinces gives assurance that the party officials who will dominate the Congress , and the Central Committee it will elect , will all have passed the tightest possible Khrushchev screening , both for loyalty to him and for competence and performance on the job .
Nor in South Georgia , where the summer sun shines warmly and gives early life to the things growing in the flat fields .
One night , at the close of the evening service , he came forward , left his resentment at the altar and gave his heart to God .
Jesus not only taught forgiveness , He gave us an example of it on the cross .
And so the young minister resigned , to go and study and pray , having never passed a day , he told his parishioners , when `` I did not gain from you far more than I ever gave to you '' .
His very honest act called up the recent talk I had with another minister , a modest Methodist , who said : `` I feel so deeply blessed by God when I can give a message of love and comfort to other men , and I would have it no other way : and it is unworthy to think of self .
A man who gives himself to God and to the believers of his church takes upon himself a life of giving .
But how little love we give him .
And with that he walked off to give instruction to a rookie pitcher .
I know , that my son wants control and direction , but being autistic myself I cannot give full control or direction .
I try to give him as many normal experiences as possible .
You sometimes give them a little demonstration , a little guidance , and suggestions about staying inside the lines .
Contrarily , Republican `` volunteers '' go their separate ways , and thus far have given no indication that they 'd be willing to join forces under a single directorate , except in the most loose-knit fashion .
A top official of the New Frontier who kept a record of his first weeks on the job here gives this report of his experiences :
Mr. Dwyer said that although it was obvious that Mr. Rayburn was not well he stopped , gave the youngster his autograph , asked where he was from and expressed the hope that he would enjoy his visit to Congress .
It is at precisely such moments that he encounters a couple of undergraduates , faces alight , holding hands and talking happily as they come along , oblivious of him , or throwing him the most fleeting and casual of glances , such as they would give a tethered goat .
Yet , in 1960 all eight gave majorities to Mr. Kennedy .
But it is in the process of so doing because it apparently gives priority to trying to downgrade John F. Kennedy .
A few weeks ago , I read in the Bulletin that there were to be given Chinese classes in Cranston .
Words cannot tell of the undivided attention and comfort their service gave to me .
Why should Congress even consider allowing such a sum for that which can give no protection ?
As we understand , this directive was given to all city and county employes .
The bill which passed the Assembly last May and is now pending in the Senate should be given careful scrutiny .
One even gave my little dog a biscuit .
Far from creating fear , as the speaker suggests , preparedness - knowing what to do in an emergency - gives people confidence .
Since the Connally amendment has the effect of giving the same right to the other party to a dispute with the United States , it also prevents us from using the court effectively .
Educate the city employes to give real service to the public .
Actually , of course , that label `` controversial '' applied only because he was carrying out the mandate given him by the world organization he headed rather than following the dictates of the Soviet Union .
After declaring , in an article last month in Frontier magazine , that the Russian testing `` carries with it the possibility of the most tragic consequences of any action in the history of the world '' , he gave this estimate of the biologic and genetic consequences if the new Soviet shots totaled 200 megatons :
We can vote in the UN against South African apartheid or Portuguese rule in Angola , but we cannot even introduce a motion on the Berlin Wall - much less , give the simple order to push the Wall down .
On the eve of the `` great debate '' on the proposal to give the President broad powers to make across-the-board tariff concessions which could practically bring us into the Atlantic Community , we should face the alternatives on this proposition .
Create a free market here , give us a sound , debt-free money system , and we 'll compete with anyone , Europe and Asia combined .
You have on more than one occasion praised the idea of a televised press conference and the chance it gives the people to form intelligent opinions .
He made the most of the long Brahmsian phrases , and by the directness and drive of his playing gave the work a handsome performance .
A Sonata for Violin and Piano , called `` Bella Bella '' , by Robert Fleming , was given its first United States performance .
The title refers to the nickname given his wife by the composer , who is also a member of the National Film Board of Canada .
Since she also has considerable technical virtuosity and a feeling for music in the romantic tradition , Miss Xydis gave her listeners a good deal of pleasure .
The Rachmaninoff Prelude No .12 , Op. 32 , for instance , gave her an opportunity to exploit one of her special facilities - the ability to produce fine deep-sounding bass tones while contrasting them simultaneously with fine silver filagree in the treble .
`` It only does harm to talk to troops about new and desirable equipment which others may have but which you cannot give them .
He may have a point in urging that decadent themes be given fewer prizes .
After all , Alger Hiss , subsequently convicted of perjury in denying that he gave secret State Department documents to Soviet agents , was at Yalta .
Recognizing that there could have been no effective negotiated peace with Hitler , he points out the shocking failure to give support to the anti-Nazi underground , which very nearly eliminated Hitler in 1944 .
Laura is a good role for Miss Resnik , and she gave it force , dramatic color and passion .
Both techniques give the music purity and clarity .
Couperin and Rameau gave titles to nearly everything they wrote , not in the later sense of `` program music '' but as a kind of nonmusical reference for the close , clear musical forms filled with keen wit and precise utterance .
Yes , Arlene is her name ; the work uses the old eighteenth-century tradition of giving the part of a young inexperienced youth to a soprano .
Putting on local musicians at this place in the program serves a triple purpose : it saves the top flight jazz men from being wasted in this unenviable spot , when the audience is cold , restless , and in flux ; it prevents late-comers from missing some of the people they have come a long way to hear , and it gives the resident musicians a chance to perform before the famous Newport audience .
Do you say chantey , as if the word were derived from the French word chanter , to sing , or do you say shanty and think of a roughly built cabin , which derives its name from the French-Canadian use of the word chantier , with one of its meanings given as a boat-yard ?
Here , as in `` Journal '' , Mr. Louis has given himself the lion 's share of the dancing , and there is no doubt that he is capable of conceiving and executing a wide variety of difficult and arresting physical movements .
Eugene Lester assembled a witty and explicit score for `` An American Journey '' , and Malcolm McCormick gave it sprightly imaginative costumes .
At the same time the orchestra announced that next season it would be giving twenty-five programs at Carnegie , and that it would be taking these concerts to the suburbs , repeating each of them in five different communities .
This season the orchestra has already taken a step toward the suburbs in that it is giving six subscription concerts for the Orchestral Society of Westchester in the County Center in White Plains .
The details of the suburban concerts next season , and the centers in which they will be given , will be announced later , Mr. Toobin said .
Mr. Cliburn gave the slow movement some of the quality of a Chopin Nocturne .
If one of Mr. Rodgers ' melodies seemed to deserve a better fate than interment in Boston or the obscurity of a Broadway failure , Mr. Hart was likely to deck it out with new lyrics to give it a second chance in another show .
Only once in a very long while comes a book that gives the reader a magic sense of sharing a rare experience .
There is Mijbil , an otter who travelled with Maxwell - and gave Maxwell 's name to a new species - from the Tigris marshes to his London flat .
The brief details of Mijbil 's death lend depth to the story , give it an edge of ironic tragedy .
Man , to whom Mij gave endless affection and fealty , was responsible in the form of a road worker with a pickaxe who somehow becomes an abstract symbol of the savage in man .
Hirsch says that he has given the role certain qualities he has observed in the city toughs of the real world .
For its final change of bill in its London season , the Leningrad State Kirov Ballet chose tonight to give one of those choreographic miscellanies known as a `` gala program '' at the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden .
No doubt the underlying idea was to show that for all the elegance and artistry that have distinguished its presentations thus far , it too could give a circus if it pleased .
But the growing number of Negro-appeal radio stations , plus evidence of strong listener support of their advertisers , give time salesmen an impressive argument as they approach new prospects .
All belong to the collection being given to Wilmington over a period of years by Mrs. Sloan , who has cherished such revelatory items ever since she first studied with Sloan at the Art Students League , New York , in the 1920 's .
Robert Riefling , who gave the only piano recital of the recently concluded 23 rd Beethoven Festival , penetrated deep into the spirit of the style .
Herr Riefling , in everything he gave his large Beethoven Hall audience , proved himself as an interpreter of unobtrusive authority .
This would give the hydrogen atom a slight charge-excess .
This slim book , while giving the reader only a fleeting glimpse of the scientific mind confronting the universe , has the appeal that informed conversation always has .
There would seem to be some small solace in the prospect that the missile race between nations is at the same time accelerating the study of the space around us , giving us a long-sought ladder from which to peer at alien regions .
Alvin Ailey and Carmen De Lavallade appeared in the first New York performance of Mr. Ailey 's `` Roots of the Blues '' , a work given its premiere three weeks ago at the Boston Arts Festival .
It is not simply giving a repetition of the program it gave during its New York engagement earlier this season , but has brought back many of the numbers that were on the bill when it paid us its first visit and won everybody 's heart .
The `` Suite of Old Russian Dances '' that opened that inaugural program with the slow and modest entrance of the maidens and built steadily into typical Moiseyev vigor and warmth ; the amusing `` Yurochka '' , in which a hard-to-please young man is given his come-uppance ; the lovely ( and of course vigorous ) `` Polyanka '' or `` The Meadow '' ; the three Moldavian dances entitled `` Zhok '' ; the sweet and funny little dance about potato planting called `` Bul ' ba '' ; and the hilarious picture of social life in an earlier day called `` City Quadrille '' are all just as good as one remembers them to have been , and they are welcome back .
Never given to mincing words , he places heavy blame upon the faulty , uncourageous leadership of Britain and particularly America .
`` America gave generously in economic aid and military equipment to friend and foe alike '' .
Such a man must be able and willing to give clear and sensible advice to the whole group , a person in whom all the member nations will have absolute confidence .
`` Monty '' shows a remarkable capacity for the direct statement and an equally remarkable incapacity for giving adequate support .
Food may act as a sedative , giving temporary emotional solace , just as , for some people , alcohol does .
It was `` Duty '' he said that his parents had given him as a rule - beyond even the love that suffused his being and the sense of humor with which he was largely supplied - and it was duty he would perform , though it cost him acute pain and exhausted him by the age of fifty .
`` If it gave me pleasure to say hard things '' , he wrote , `` I would shut up forever '' .
So we are the more prepared to give Parker the credit for having taken the right side in an unnecessary controversy , to salute his courage , and to pass on , happily forgetting both him and the entire episode .
Here I took my leave of my learned friends to step out on another path , to which we might give the modern name of Pragmatism , or the thing that works .
In his heart he had that peace of which the Lord spoke when He said , `` Peace I leave with you , my peace I give unto you : not as the world giveth , give I unto you .
How often have I looked to Jesus when entering the sick room , asking for His presence and help in my professional duties as I give my talents not only as the world giveth but as one who loves the Saviour and His creatures .
`` God so loved the world , that he gave his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but have everlasting life '' , and `` as many as received him , to them gave he power to become the sons of God , even to them that believe on his name '' .
It is to those who believe on His name and belong to Him that He gives His peace ; not that empty peace the world offers , but a deep , abiding peace which nothing can destroy .
Why not open your heart to the Lord Jesus Christ now , accept Him as your Saviour and let Him fill you with peace that only He can give .
Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul '' ?
`` For God so loved the world , that he gave his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but have everlasting life '' ( John 3 : 16 ) .
People are giving their doctors a hard time .
Watch people flock to amusement houses , cocktail lounges , and night clubs that advertise continuous entertainment , which means an endless flow of noise and frivolity by paid entertainers who are supposed to perform in those incredible ways which are designed to give men a few hours of dubious relaxation - watch them and you can tell that many of them are running away from something .
- those were His very first creative words - He began the world with light - this God still gives light to a world which man has plunged into darkness .
Why should we not have the same faith , and an even greater experience of the light which it gives ?
The apostle Paul said the same thing in the language and faith of the New Testament : `` He that spared not His own Son , but delivered Him up for us all , how shall He not with Him freely give us all things ?
And so the psalmist gives us one more picture of God : `` The Lord is the strength of my life '' .
The social time gives an opportunity for church leaders to become acquainted with the new members .
This gives greater opportunity for the learning process .
Nevertheless , the consequence of the policy proposed is everywhere subtly qualified : it is `` a possible result , however improbable '' ; `` the worst , and least probable '' result ; `` if it did n't prevail mankind would still be given the opportunity of prevailing '' ; for `` surely anything is better than a policy which allows for the possibility of nuclear war '' .
Toynbee seems to think that there is some other way to give justice social embodiment .
And yet there is a note of hope , because this same science that is giving us the power of the atom is also giving us atomic vision .
Although a complete picture cannot be given , we can indicate some aspects of life into which the Christian faith entered as at least one creative factor .
Many of them had once been members of a church or at least had been given instruction in Christianity but for one or another reason had allowed the connexion to lapse .
With such a dream arising , at least in part , from the Protestant heritage of the United States and built into the foundations of the nation , it is not surprising that many efforts were made to give it concrete expression .
Several of the movements were given a marked impetus by revivalism .
As a youth he became one of Finney 's band of evangelists and gave himself to winning young men .
The anti-slavery movement and other contemporary reforms and philanthropies were given leadership and financial undergirding by Arthur Tappan ( 1786 - 1865 ) and his younger brother , Lewis Tappan ( 1788 - 1873 ) .
If a man lived a classical life , he need not fear the spirits - for only lack of virtue gave the spirits power over him .
'' Thou mayst have supernatural powers `` , exclaimed Yang Shan , '' yet thou must give back the Spirit of Buddha to me `` .
Then the monk praised Yang Shan saying : '' I have come over to China in order to worship Manjucri , and met unexpectedly with Minor Shakya `` , and after giving the master some palm leaves he brought from India , went back through the air .
And the life that I now live in the flesh , I live in the faith of the Son of God , who loved me and gave himself up for me .
But to as many as received him he gave the power of becoming sons of God ; to those who believe in his name : Who were born not of blood , nor of the will of the flesh , nor of the will of man , but of God .
Finally men arrested Him , gave Him a mock trial , flogged Him , nailed Him on a cross and hung Him between earth and heaven ; and God allowed it .
It was a simple ivory crucifix which my mother had given me .
Nuclear weapons are fearsome , but the long-range ballistic missile gives them a stealth and merciless swiftness which is much more terrifying .
Nuclear weapons have given the world the means for self-destruction in hours or days ; and now rockets have given it the means to destroy itself in minutes .
ICBMs have given us a capability which could be used in two different ways .
We must make certain that the aircraft is finished before we give the entire job to the missile .
An aircraft with a load of small nuclear weapons could very conceivably be given a mission to suppress all trains operating within a specified geographic area of Russia - provided that we had used some of our ICBMs to degrade Russia 's air defenses before our bombers got there .
Forces will survive a surprise attack , and these forces will give depth , or considerable duration , to the conflict .
If you walk into the ring because it is fun to show your dog , he will feel it and give you a good performance !
He gave a resume of the steps taken in order for the boy he sponsored to win the scholarship .
This gave the Juniors the use of the entire ring at the show - a great advantage to them !
She then went over them thoroughly giving each a strenuous test in showmanship .
The Intermediates in the Class with the Judge were asked to pick 4 winners and give their reasons but their decisions did not affect the choice of the Judge .
This Class can be just as successful in the dog world if it is given a chance .
Great thought has been given to making life easier for the growing boating population of the country ; and to making the owning of a boat simpler .
Each of these fine groups gives free boating classes in seamanship piloting and small boat handling .
This is not necessarily to green , however , for in some situations only a yellow indication is given to a train to let it into the `` plant '' .
This gives you the spacing for locating the left-hand piece `` B '' .
Figs .7 and 8 give all pertinent dimensions .
Fig. 8 gives the dimensions for locating the dog-pin holes .
The answers they give can often pave the way to performance increases and , quite often , are necessary for completing entry blanks for different events .
Multiplying the result by the number of cylinders in the engine gives the engine 's total displacement .
Dimensions in inches , and fractions of inches will give the displacement in cubic inches .
Dimensions in centimeters and fractions of centimeters will give the displacement in cubic centimeters ( cc ) .
The 240 - grain bullet leaves the muzzle at 1850 fps , which gives it all the smash needed at woods ranges .
Previously known as Jefferson Arms , Kodiak has given this 11 - shot hammerless job an exceptionally fine stock design , and the 260 is the first autoloader to handle .22 Magnum rim-fires .
The bore is unrifled but is provided with an insert tube which is rifled and which , surprisingly , gives pretty fair accuracy even though it 's only 3 - 1 2 inches long .
Any special photographic requirements are also given .
You 'll never hear `` sayonara '' , the Japanese word for goodbye , from your guests when you give a hibachi party .
Instructions for preparing clay , drying , glazing and firing are not given .
Outside was finished with Creek-Turn brown toner brushed on and sponged off to give antique finish .
With only two aboard , Hotei does better than 27 mph - and she gives a comfortable ride at this speed even in a three-foot chop .
After the frames and transom are set up on the jig and temporarily braced , a piece of three-inch-wide mahogany ( only widths will be given since the 13 16 - inch thickness is used throughout ) is butted between frames one and two below the line of the keelson .
Then remove it and give the whole bottom a coat of resin .
Whether electricity and public water and sewers are available or not , check the local customs in the use of bottled or L-P gas ( we give you alternatives later on ) .
With this first issue we give you a list of the materials needed to build the basic ( A version ) and the expandable ( B version ) .
You will find a chart giving the various speed ratios available with your particular drill press somewhere in the instruction booklet that came with the tool .
'' Information is hereby given that Mr. Timothy Palmer of Newburyport , Mass. has agreed to take charge of the concerns of the Patentees of the Chain Bridge , in the states of Massachusetts , New Hampshire , Vermont , Rhode Island , and Connecticut , so far as relates to the sale of Patent rights and the construction of Chain Bridges .
Do n't urge your builder to give you a little extra cooling capacity just to be sure you have enough .
reputedly all he did was give her a handful of peanuts , but he said simultaneously , `` I wish they were emeralds '' .
What he does do is give himself away by communicating information over and above the words involved .
The order to abandon ship was given , but cries of pain could be heard from the wounded below decks .
Shaw could also give the flyer a pretty good idea of area visibility by a visual check of the mountains to be seen from his station .
This gives you a wide and varied choice .
This gives him the power to form in his mind new image combinations of old memories , ideas and experiences and to project them outside of himself into his environment in new and ever-changing forms .
That is , locking the room or stateroom door gives privacy of location , but it is equally important to be sure there is time enough for an utterly unhurried fulfillment .
The pain and distress associated with the performance may easily give the wife a deep-seated dread of marital relations and cause her , unconsciously , to make the sex act unpleasant and difficult for both by exercising her vaginal muscles to complicate his penetration instead of relaxing them to facilitate it .
Serious attention must also be given to the husband 's problems in the honeymoon situation .
She gave herself a title - Lady Diana Harrington .
The New York D. A. gave her another-the Golden Girl of cafe society .
Houston police gave her a third , less flamboyant , title - prostitute .
She was still in the play for pay business when she died , a top trollop who had given the world 's oldest profession one of its rare flashes of glamour .
`` Our information is that she gave the proceeds of her acts to Jelke '' .
I never gave that boy a cent .
The Greek evidently fell for her , `` Monsieur X '' recounted , and to clinch what he thought was an affair in the making he gave her 100000 francs ( about $ 300 ) and led her to the roulette tables .
If the latter knows nothing about the absent sitter except his name ( given by the experimenter ) , he cannot possibly give any clues , conscious or unconscious , far less ask leading questions .
He gives this to the medium at the appointed time , and the reading then will be concerned with material about or messages from the communicator .
So each reading can be given a weight and each reading a score by adding up these weights .
So , after the sitting has been held , several readings at one time are mailed , and the distant sitter ( whose name or whose communicator 's name was given to the medium ) must mark each little item as Correct ( Hit ) , Incorrect ( Miss ) , Doubtful , or Especially Significant ( applying to him and , he feels , not to anyone else ) .
Conversely , if he gives a heavy rating to his own reading , and finds more accurate facts in it than in the others , a point is chalked up for the intrinsic , objective meaningfulness of this type of mediumistic material .
Does she accurately give dates , ages , kind of occupation ?
I asked the same questions inside the launch-control rooms of an Atlas missile base in Wyoming , where officers who wear sidearms are manning the `` commit buttons '' that could start a war - accidentally or by design - and in the command centers where other pistol-packing men could give orders to push such buttons .
Even the President cannot pick up his telephone and give a `` go '' order .
His consoles can give him instant contact with more than seventy bases around the world and with every SAC aircraft .
Perhaps this is what gives the aborigine his odd air of dignity .
Every bone and muscle in his body showed , but he did not give the appearance of starving .
There was also a long wooden spear and a woomera , a spear-throwing device which gives the spear an enormous velocity and high accuracy .
On the downstream , or `` pavilion '' , side these vaults give out onto terraces twice as wide as the bridge itself .
Through the Frankfurt Jewish Kulturbund he began to give sonata recitals in synagogues , with Cellist Emanuel Feuermann .
As more and more Jewish musicians lost their jobs with professional organizations Steinberg united them into the Frankfurt Kulturbund Orchestra , which also gave guest performances in other German cities .
John Adams took to heart the advice given him by his legal mentor , Jeremiah Gridley , to `` pursue the study of the law , rather than the gain of it '' .
Most avant-garde creators , true to their interest in the self-sufficiency of pure movement , have tended to dress their dancers in simple lines and solid colors ( often black ) and to give them a bare cyclorama for a setting .
But in this approach it is the artist 's ultimate insight , rather than his immediate impressions , that gives form to the work .
An exploration of these possible relationships constitutes the process of creation and thereby gives form to the dance .
A pervading quality of free lyricism and a building from turns close to the ground towards jumps into the air gives the work its central focus .
Though his election was interpreted by many Southerners as the forerunner of a dangerous shift in the federal balance in favor of the Union , Lincoln himself proposed no such change in the rights the Constitution gave the states .
In his Message of December 2 , 1862 , he put his purpose and his policy in these words - which I would call the Lincoln Law of Liberty-and-Union : `` In giving freedom to the slave , we assure freedom to the free '' .
But before this came about , 214938 Americans had given their lives in battle for the two concepts of the sovereign rights of men and of states .
To my knowledge , Lincoln remains the only Head of State and Commander-in-Chief who , while fighting a fearful war whose issue was in doubt , proved man enough to say this publicly - to give his foe the benefit of the fact that in all human truth there is some error , and in all our error , some truth .
It is much less difficult now than in Lincoln 's day to see that on both sides sovereign Americans had given their lives in the Civil War to maintain the balance between the powers they had delegated to the States and to their Union .
The 140414 Americans who gave `` the last full measure of devotion '' to prevent disunion , preserved individual freedom in the United States from the dangers of anarchy , inherent in confederations , which throughout history have proved fatal in the end to all associations composed primarily of sovereign states , and to the liberties of their people .
But the fact that 70524 other Americans gave the same measure of devotion to an opposing concept served Liberty-and-Union in other essential ways .
The lives so many of them gave , to forestall what they believed would be a fatal encroachment by the Union on the powers reserved to their states have continued ever since to safeguard all Americans against freedom 's other foe .
Instead of giving themselves spontaneously to the orgiastic release that jazz can give them , they undergo psychoanalysis or flirt with mysticism or turn to prostitutes for satisfaction .
Only rarely is attention given to accurate progress reports and evaluation .
There are other countries where , with skillful diplomacy , we may be able by our aid to give encouragement to those groups in government which would like to press forward with economic and social reform measures to promote growth .
But there will be still other countries where , despite the inadequacy of the level of self-help , we shall deem it wise , for political or military reasons , to give substantial economic assistance .
If the less developed countries are to be persuaded to adopt a long-term approach , the United States , as the principal supplier of external aid , must be prepared to give long-term commitments .
But this we know : Here is a great life that in every area of American politics gives the American people occasion for pride and that has invested the democratic process with the most decent qualities of honor , decency , and self-respect .
Thus , there has come into being a situation in which the state must raise all of its own revenues and , in addition , must give assistance to its local governments .
The replies from each individual town are not given in detail because the questions asked the personal opinion of the several assessors and are not necessarily the established policy of the town in each case .
This office cooperates with the U. S. Department of Commerce in giving statewide coverage to services which include : statistics on markets abroad ; locating foreign agents , buyers , distributors , etc. ; information on foreign and domestic import duties and regulations , licensing , investments , and establishing of branch representatives or plants abroad , and documentary requirements concerning export shipments and arrangements for payment .
First priority will be given to the preparation of a meaningful state guide plan to serve as a background for all other planning activities in the state .
In preparing the state guide plan , particular attention will be given means of strengthening the economy of the state through the development of industry and recreation .
Armed Forces Day is the annual report on this investment , a public presentation designed to give our own people , and the people of other lands who stand with us for peace with freedom and justice , the best possible opportunity to see and understand what we have and why we have it .
It is the purpose of Armed Forces Day to give Americans an opportunity to honor men of the Armed Forces , those who have made the supreme sacrifice , those who remain to preserve our security .
Many hours are given free by the Jaycees to make this and all local pageants outstanding events .
The State Ballet of Rhode Island , the first incorporated group , was formed for the purpose of extending knowledge of the art of ballet in the Community , to promote interest in ballet performances , to contribute to the cultural life of the State , and to provide opportunity for gifted dance students who , for one reason or another , are unable to pursue a career and to develop others for the professional state ; And now , therefore , do I , John A. Notte , Jr. , Governor of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations , proclaim the week of Monday , November 13 , 1961 , as the State Ballet of Rhode Island Week , requesting all Rhode Islanders to give special attention to this unusual event which should contribute to the cultural life of the State .
They had been through trying times , but their faith in the Almighty had given them the courage and the strength to meet and overcome the many problems and difficulties that were the price they had to pay for freedom .
And so , let us remember on this day not only to thank the Almighty Who gave hope and courage to the Pilgrims , but also to place our trust in Him that He will continue to protect us in the future as He has in the past .
In the family 's own words ( during the third of twelve visits ) , they had `` reached the crisis peak - either the situation will give or we will break '' !
My aim in mentioning this factor obviously is not to give license to `` wild therapy '' but rather to encourage us to use the time-honored clinical casework skills we already possess , and to use them with greater confidence , precision , and professional pride .
In the reports , summary results are given for both the de facto ( a and c ) and de jure ( a and b ) populations ; but the subsequent analysis of characteristics is reported only for the de jure population ( or , in some districts , only the de facto population ) .
These were the same subjects who were given the Rorschach test .
A t test on these two groups , shifters vs. nonshifters , gave a `` t '' value of 2.405 which is significant on the two-tail test at the .028 level .
Only 27 % ( 11 subjects ) gave a positive Kohnstamm reaction when completely nai ^ ve concerning the phenomenon .
There were 49 % ( 20 subjects ) who did not give a positive reaction even after they were informed of the normalcy of such a reaction and had been given a demonstration .
One subject changed when given only the information that some people have something happen to their arm when they relax .
Five subjects ( 12 % ) did not change until they had been told that some people have something happen to their arm , what that something was , and also were given a demonstration .
The subjects were only given information about other possibilities of `` normal '' reaction .
They continued to give an arm-elevation .
A suggestion hypothesis also seems inadequate as an explanation for those who shifted their reactions after they were informed of the possibilities of `` normal '' reactions different from those which they gave .
Instructions to relax , i. e. , to be `` spontaneous '' , and react immediately to whatever impulse they might have , was not sufficiently reassuring until some idea of the possibilities of normal reactions had been given .
This subject , who has been undergoing psychoanalytic psychotherapy for five years , did not give a positive Kohnstamm reaction under any of the four standardized conditions used in this experiment while sober .
These suggested interpretations were given by the subjects spontaneously when they were told that there were people who reacted differently than they had .
This subject was one who gave an arm-elevation on the second trial in the nai ^ ve state but not in the first .
In contrast to this voluntary-control explanation for nonreactivity given by the Kohnstamm-positive subjects , the Kohnstamm-negative subjects offered an involuntary-control hypothesis to explain nonreactivity .
While the interpretations that have been given are inferences only , they gain support from such comments as the following , which was made by one of the Kohnstamm-negative subjects who did not , on the first trial , perceive the tilt illusion .
I 'm going to become a good nurse , and I 've got two baby brothers that are going to have college if I have to work at my profession until I 'm an old maid to give it to them '' .
We were paid off Tuesday morning and given tickets back to New York .
He gave me a ticket on the agency car and parked it .
I could n't see him , but the electric bugging device gave steady beeps when it was straight ahead , short half beeps when the car I was following was to the left , and long drawn-out beeps when it turned to the right .
I noticed that he was in Unit 12 and that he had registered under the name of Oscar L. Palmer and wife , giving a San Francisco address .
I used the alias of Robert C. Richards , gave the first three letters and the first and last figure of the license number on the agency heap , but a couple of phony numbers in between .
I took another sidelong glance at the other registration card , then took the key to Unit 13 that she had given me and went down long enough to park the car .
She gave a little pout and said , `` I do n't get off work until eleven o ' clock .
There was no word spoken , no apparent signal given .
In Rourke 's car , Shayne drove east to Biscayne Boulevard and north toward Felice Perrin 's address which had been given to him by the Peralta governess .
Turn to the left , I think , for that number you gave me .
He advanced slowly , directly , giving no hint of a feint to either side .
`` What reason did she give '' ?
What Gabriel was being asked to do now , however , was to re-examine all his basic assumptions , make value-judgments on them , and give them new and different powers in his mind to govern his motives .
`` It 's a kind of agreement in which each party gives something to the other '' , Jack said .
`` We regard it as fair only when each party feels that what he has received is as valuable , or more valuable , than what he has given '' .
Though it might be that we would have much to give you , you have nothing to give us '' .
We will gladly entertain your young and give them proper living quarters , in return for their help in running our fusion reactors .
Still , it sometimes gives you a creepy feeling to find a rabbit or a snapping turtle on some strange world .
`` Listen , Ekstrohm , I want to give you the benefit of every doubt .
I give you my word I 'm not trying to pull some stupid kind of joke , or to deliberately foul up the expedition .
She lived and was given a name .
`` If you substitute ' atom ' for ' angel ' , the problem is not insoluble , given the metallic content of the pin in question '' .
The half-man woke , recognized Mercer and gave him a healthily sleepy grin .
He had no idea how much time Budd would give him .
Could you give us a job , Mr. - - '' .
He was silent a moment , thinking he could use a man this time of year , and if the girl could cook , it would give him more time in the meadows , but he knew nothing about the couple .
He had n't shaved for several weeks , his sparse beard giving his face a pathetic , woebegone expression .
I gave you a drink and then you went to sleep '' .
When they were finally satisfied , Jones said , `` I think he 's going to give us work '' .
And you wanted no part of me when I had so much to give .
A lantern hung from a peg , giving light .
At the same moment Wheeler Fiske fired the rifle Mike had given him and another guerrilla was hit .
The glow of the fire reached through the openings in the windows , giving light enough to examine Mike 's wound .
Oso gave me an unruffled look .
His eyes were dark , fluid , fearful , and he gave a sigh as my knife went in .
Having nothing else to do except wait for my forms to be processed , I gave myself over to speculations concerning the hall itself .
At one and the same time , she was within it but still searching for the drawbridge that would give her entry .
She had the feeling that , under the mouldering leaves , there would be the bodies of dead animals , quietly decaying and giving their soil back to the mountain .
How strange it was that he could give her this handsome house and carte blanche as to its beautiful furnishings , and fail her in - spiritual ways .
So had Miss Shawnee Rakestraw , full of criticisms about the changes here , giving thanks that her dear old father had gone to his Heavenly Rest last year , saying how much she enjoyed her boarding house in town in inclement weather , was looking forward to Quinzaine Spa this summer .
It made him pretty hot under the collar , after the idea Miss Sis had given him , to be told by Miss Kiz that her holy spa was all reserved for this summer and next , if you please , and that much as she regretted it , they would be unable to entertain Mrs. Robards and the children .
Roy smiled - he did have a nice smile - took off his hat most politely , told her to hop in , and he 'd give her a lift to Quinzaine .
An old man , sitting against the wall of a cottage and waiting for the sun to find him , gave her a more than reflective look as she passed , the sap still plainly rising in his branches .
He gave a short hard laugh and looked at her knowingly .
Her nose was higher of bridge , her complexion so pale as to be quite susceptible to sunburn , and the fish and vegetable diet of her forebears had given her teeth that were white and regular and strong .
Eating while angry had given her a slight indigestion .
He wisecracked about the captain 's indoctrination of new men , took great delight in slaughtering cockroaches with ethyl chloride , and gave no thought for tomorrow .
This gave Doc the whole range of the naval establishment , and suited him quite well .
It gave her a lewd , winking effect .
The management discreetly withdrew the green stuff into the office and gave the customers chips or checks or premium points .
Rachel gave me a direct , bright-eyed look .
Orders were given to dig .
I studied Welch closely as the trial progressed for any hint which might give me a lead as to how he might be thwarted .
Somehow managing to get out a cool , poised , `` Wo n't you hold on a second , please '' , I covered up the mouthpiece , and with more warmth and less poise , gave a quick lecture on crime and punishment , mostly the latter , including Devil 's Island and the remoter reaches of Siberia .
I sighed , thinking that among other things , people here seemed to be those who would have to cut down if they earned less than $ 85000 yearly ; people who would give their teeth for a chance to get on `` Person to Person '' ; people who thought it was nice to be important , but not important to be nice ; who were more ingratiating than gracious , more personalities than persons .
Never once did he buy me a single gift and for our third anniversary he gave me a dislocated jaw .
Having the deepest of maternal instincts , my heart fairly bled when I thought of the darling pink and white `` bundles from heaven '' I would have proudly given my husband .
As Mrs. Letch Feeley , was it any wonder that I , once the social arbiter of Filmdom , was excluded from the smart entertainments given by the Astaires , the Coopers , the Gables , the Colmans , the Rathbones , the Taylors , the Thalbergs and such devout , closely knit families as the Barrymores and the Crosbys ?
